->
APMC Acts: What and Why?
to stop farmer exploitation by money lander
State governments started enacting Agricultural Produce Market Committee (APMC) acts since 50s.
APMC acts run on two principles:

Ensure that intermediaries (and money lenders) do not compel farmers to sell their produce at @throwaway prices
All food produce should first be brought to the market yard=> sell through auction=farmers gets good money.
Under APMC Acts:

A State is geographically divided and Market (Mandis) are established at different places within the states.
Farmers have to sell their produce through the auction @mandi.
To operate in Mandi, a trader has to get license.
Wholesale, retail traders (e.g. shopping mall owner) or food processing company etc cannot buy farm output directly from farmer.
 They’ve to get it through the Mandi.
Old APMC Acts: Problems?
Membership	
State APMC Market Committees have 10-17 members
Either elected or nominated by Government in accordance with provisions of the respective State APMC Act.
But in several States, regular elections of APMCs = not held.
APMC board are administrated by bureaucrats. 
bureaucrats run the show= red tapes + bribery
Farmers Cheated	Most Mandi traders do following:
Even after receiving the fruit/veggies/grains, they delay payment to farmers
If payment is done on spot, then trader would arbitrarily deduct some amount, on excuse that he has not received payments from the other parties.
To avoid tax/cess, the traders don’t give sale slips to farmers=>Later it is difficult for farmer to prove his ‘income’ to get loans from banks.

Double Commission	
Middlemen @Mandi charge commission on both seller (farmer) + buyer (the urban retailer / food processor)
=double commission=final consumer has to pay even more!


Resistance To Reform	
Middlemen have rent-seekers mentality.
They resist anything that’ll increase transparency or reduce transaction cost and time.
Even when electronic auction centres were established like the Safal National Exchange in Bangalore, the existing markets did not allow the transition to a transparent system.
No Value Addition	
Middlemen have no facilities to do grading/sorting,they only pass producto to final consumer.
Price Discovery	
But for most perishables fruits/veggies, government doesn’t declare MSP.so middleman has final say.
No auction	
Even if auction is held, collectively these traders keep low bidding so farmer never benefits.
Cess	
Cess= tax on tax
In every Mandi, every transaction is subjected to market tax + market cess.
This Cess money is to be used for further development of Mandi infrastructure- sorting grading storage facilities etc.
but that doens't happen so high wastage.


License raj=Lootera-raj
To operate in an APMC Market (Mandi), you need to get a license. to get license you should have a shop warehouse
since it is limited in number to it leads to bribery practices.high investment for middlemen/trader  which recovered
from farmer.



In Mandi, even weighmen, Paddlers, Hamals have to get license 

Hoarding
middlemen control on supply chain.


APMC Definition vs MSP
In APMC Acts, the definition of “agriculture”=very wide and vogue.
Although main focus was on cereals, pulses and oil-seeds, even horticulture produce (fruits and veggies)
also came within the broad definition of agriculture.MSP only for cereal ,pulses ,oil seeds only

2003	model APMC act enacted by centre but has to be implemented by state as agri is state subject
2012	So far only 16 states have adopted the model APMC act. 

Model APMC Act: Salient Features
New Model Act	Old Bogus Act
Farmer doesn’t need to bring his produce to APMC Mandi. He can directly sell it to whomever he wants..
Farmers Processors, exporters, graders, packers, etc. can buy agricultural produce directly from farmers.
Permits Private market yards, Direct Purchase Centers, farmers’ market for doing trade in agriculture produce. 
old act only state management mandi can do the trade.
Public Private Partnership in the management and development of agricultural markets in the country for post-harvest handling, cold storage, pre-cooling facilities, pack houses etc.	lolz
A separate Chapter to regulate and promote contract-farming arrangements in the country.
Dispute resolution mechanism for contract farming.

Prohibits commission agents in any transection.
establish State Agricultural Produce Marketing Standards Bureau
for Grading, Standardization and Quality Certification of agricultural produce 

Increased the responsibilities of APMC committee. They have to:
ensure complete transparency in pricing system and transactions taking place in market area;
ensure payment for agricultural produce sold by farmers on the same day;
promote agricultural processing + value addition
Publish data on arrivals and rates of agricultural produce brought into the market area for sale.
Setup and promote public private partnership in Mandi Management.
maha-lolz
Ok this new Model APMC act sounds all well and good. But here are the problems

Model APMC Act: Limitations/Problems
So far, Only 16 states adopted the Model APMC Act (as of 2012). Why? Because Middleman/trader lobby made truckload of cash from exploiting farmers and consumers. Part of that money given in election funding to ruling parties in States=>reforms stalled.
Model APMC act is not ‘uniformly’ adopted, states have made their own modifications. For example
Andhra	Andhra Pradesh permitted private markets but they’ve to pay a license fee of Rs 50,000 and project must be min.10 crores =discourages small farmer/trader associations from setting up their own private markets.
Odisha	Orissa has not permitted private markets for paddy/rice
Haryana	Only adopted Contract farming related provisions.
Some states	Even the private markets are subjected to Mandi tax and Mandi cess.
commission agent	Madhya Pradesh abolished commission agent system but some other states didn’t adopt this provision of model APMC.
Bihar	
Repealed its APMC act in 2006.
Now, SDM is in-charge of the unregulated markets
No market fee are charged from the farmers But other charges for loading/unloading/Hamal charges are vogue/uncontrolled.
WB	
Yet to amend its APMC Act.
Mamata opposing the concept of contract farming on the premise that it could jeopardise farmers’ interests.
Additional suggestions to reform APMC
(These were made by committees of planning commission, inter-ministerial groups etc.)

Remove horticulture	from APMC
E-Auction	
Membership	-Open membership of APMC’s by encouraging wholesalers and retailers 
No License	 - Anyone should be allowed to trade in APMC market.
Market Committee should only fix the transaction fee and keep a Bank Guarantee from traders to ensure that the farmers’ payment is not affected.
No Cess/Tax	
Contract farming is a forward agreement between farmers and buyers

buyer	
Agrees to buy produce from farmer @predetermined price.
Usually provides inputs (Seeds, fertilizers, pesticides), technology and production practices so that final produce meets his desired quality.
farmer	
Agrees to grow and supply the produce to the buyer @ predetermined quality, quantity and prices.
Contract farming is prevalent only in those states, where the APMC acts are favorable for private player who adopted the model APMC Act.

State	Farm produce	Area under contract farming (acres)	Buyer company
Punjab	Potato, Tomato, Chilli	6000	Pepsico (for their potato chips)
Basmati, Maize	400	Mahindra Shubhlabh
Soyabean	1200	ITC
Karnataka	Ashwagandha	700	Himalaya Healthcare
Madhya Pradesh	Wheat	15,000	Hindustan Unilever
Contract Farming also done for export oriented cropping of Basmati, Chilli, Gherkins and soybean.

Below APMC-Mandi market
Below the Mandi markets, there are primary assembly markets such as village-bazaar, weekly haat in tribal areas etc.
There is wide variation in their governance. Some states run them under Panchayati Raj institutions, some states put them under supervision of district administration.
Condition of cattle markets and fish markets are even worse. Most of them do not have even basic amenities like sheds, sanitation or drinking water.
Immediate reforms/upgrades necessary in all these markets.
Direct Sale / Cooperative markets
Long before the circulation of Model Act (2003), several States had promoted Farmer’s Market. Example


Punjab and Haryana	Apni Mandi
Rajasthan	Kisan Mandi

Problem: Over the years, small traders have taken over the place of farmers in many of these markets= again problem of middlemen and commission agents.

In South Korea, with direct marketing of agricultural products= middlemen were removed and as a result:

consumer prices declined by	upto 30%
farmers’ income rose by	upto 20%
Virtual Markets
Example of such virtual markets= Future exchange, Spot Exchange, Warehouse Receipt System and Web Marketing.
In India, the Multi Commodity Exchange (MCX) and the National Commodity Derivatives Exchange (NCDEX) are the two biggest players in the agro-futures market.
NCDEX	
Setup an e-mandi (online wholesale market).
Farmer will first deposit his produce to a NCDEX nominated warehouse, gets receipt.
This receipt can be traded by the participant on the e-mandi across the country.
MCX	
Working on similar project like above, with help of Yes bank.
MCX online portal for commodity trading also available in regional languages to help non-English speaking farmers.
an allied topic is negotiable warehouse receipts, but we’ll see it in the next article under finance-taxation-FDI-exports.

ITC e-Choupal
In 2001, ITC (India Tobacco Company Limited) started small internet kiosks at the village level. Provides following:

direct procurement framework
Real time market information related to prices
Availability of inputs: seeds / fertilizers, their prices
scientific farm practices
weather, monsoon data
Dispute resolution between the company and the farmers.
Coverage	more than
farmers	4 million
villages	40,000
kiosks	6000
Thanks to ITC’s e-Choupal, farmers’ income increased by 10-15% (compared to earlier when they relied on middlemen @mandi)

Anyways we’ll see more about these intermediate market, supply chains in individual articles for fruit-veggies etc. Now moving to the next law topic

Single Food Regulator
USA	
Single regulator: Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
UK	
Food standard agency (FSA) is the single authority for formulating all food laws.
Aus+NZ	
Australia and New Zealand have a common single regulator known as  “Food Standards – Australia New Zealand (FSANZ)”
India	Totally awesome: just check the list of overlapping and outdated laws
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954 (PFA)
Essential Commodities Act 1955 (ECA)
Vegetable oils, De-oiled meal and edible flour control order, 1967 ( VPO)
Fruit Product Order, 1955 (FPO)
Meat Food Products Order, 1973 (MFPO),
Milk and Milk Products Order, 1992 (MMPO)
Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marketing) Act 1937
Bureau of Indian Standards, 1986
Standards and Weights Measure Act, 1976
Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963
In 2006, After sleeping for decades, Government enacted Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) Act to provide for a single food law regulator, and repealed those outdated acts. But until then, for so many years, those old laws did not allow Indian food processing industry to grow. How?

Problem with overlapping laws
Many ministries deal with food laws = multiple bodies which set food standards = ambiguity, confusion for consumers, traders and manufacturers.
Very few standards developed for raw agricultural produce.
They dealt only with physical parameters of size, colour and farm impurities. But not on microbiological and toxicological characteristics (which are necessary for export to US/EU).
Food laws are often inconsistent and contradicting each other.  e.g. Emulsifiers and Stabilisers are permitted for use in Jams, Marmalade & Fruit Chutney under PFA but not under FPO.
In many cases, where one standard is more stringent than the other. Then food-entrepreneur would adopt the more stringent standard in order to prevent potential penalization and bribe harassment by food inspectors.  For example, FPO allows use of artificial sweeteners in certain fruit products whereas PFA does not.  Hence, the industry avoids using artificial sweeteners altogether.
FSSAI Act 2006: Features
Established a statutory body The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) @Delhi Under the Administrative control of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Repealed various outdated central Acts viz.
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act (PFA)
Various “Orders” by Central Ministries e.g. Fruit Product Order (FPO), Meat Food Products Order. Milk and Milk Products Order, Vegetable oil, Edible flour Order etc.
FASSAI made responsible for:
Guidelines	
Scientific Food standards: frame them, enforce them
Regulate the manufacture, import, processing, distribution, and sale of food.
Make Guidelines for accreditation of food laboratories, food safety management bodies.
International technical standards for food, sanitary and phyto-sanitary standards (SPS)
Advisory	
Scientific advice and technical support to Central Government and State Governments food safety and nutrition related policies and rules.
Survey	
Collect Data on food consumption, food contamination,  biological risk etc.
Networking	
Create information network across the country to connect public, consumers, Panchayats etc.
Provide them rapid, reliable and objective information about food safety
Rapid alert system for food contamination and biological risk
Promote general awareness about food safety and food standards.
HRD	
Training to people involved in food business
In the next article, we see the finance-taxation-FDI-export matters related to food processing industry. Then we’ll dig into Supply chain management, upstream-downstream requirements for individual sectors: dairy, confectionary, fruit-veggies meat-fish, etc.



URL to article: http://mrunal.org/2013/08/food-processing-nuisance-of-apmc-acts-commission-agents-marketing-of-agricultural-produce-issues-and-constrains-for-gs-mains.html




->Food precessing sector
= Govt  initiatives
-Model APMC 2003 act to remove middleman and better horticulture handling
-FSSAI 2006 act to regulate and lay down scientific food policy of 
international standards
-Govt will set up mega food parks
-Scaling down of excise duty , increase in FDI limit, export subsidity to boost
 industry
-establishment of cold chain infra
-FCI reforms
-Many food procesing sectors earlier reserved for small scale industry opened up
-National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP) for decentralized implementation of 
various schemes 

->National mission for food processing
-centrally sponsored scheme (CSS) introduced in 2012.
-In India food processing level is very low -> high agri waste.
Objective:
-Promote Primary Processing centres close to the farms and link them with Clusters through hub and spoke models
- to assist state governments in setting up infrastructure for food processing industries.
-Facilitate exports of high value products like Cheese, Peanut butter etc
2. to spread the message about food processing and thus help in enhancing agricultural productivity.
3. to promote skill development for post-harvest and food processing industries.
4. to assist MSME in setting up Food processing units in terms of capital/technology/skill etc
5. to ensure and enhance food safety laws.

Performance:
-Exports from Agri SEZs have increased over the years
- FP clusters have been established in many regions
-Performed well investors are still ready to invest in food processing units.
-Currently, the central government has decided to de-link the project and let the state government run it on its own. This led the central government to stop giving existing 75% fund to the state government.
-The state government should now focus to use the 10% extra revenue sharing given by the central government, as per the fourteenth Finance commission recommendations in funding the NMFP.

-Ve
-Warehouses, processing facilities have not been developed.
-Very weak suplly chain,High agri waste
-Lack of model APMC so very low corporate farming and private procurement.
-Record productions of sugarcane, ground nuts, vegetables were seen but wastage was highers as export opportunities shrinked
-Sanity still an issue , EU ban on Alphanzo mango is an example.


the food processing industry in India is a rising and promising industry with investors ready to pump in money. State govt should work on to customize the model as per their requirement.



->Maggie controversy
-Recent controversy of Maggie ,it is believed to have high amount of lead and MSG
-Monosodium glutamate (MSG, also known as sodium glutamate) is the sodium salt of glutamic acid
-most abundant naturally-occurring non-essential amino acids.
- MSG is found in tomatoes, Parmesan cheese, potatoes, mushrooms, and other vegetables and fruits.
- used in the food industry as a flavor enhancer with an umami taste that intensifies the meaty, savory flavor of food
- particularly popular in Korean, Japanese and Chinese cuisine.
-large doses of MSG can cause headaches and other feelings of discomfort collectively known as Chinese Restaurant Syndrome

->Lead
-Lead interferes with a variety of body processes and is toxic to many organs and tissues including the heart, bones, intestines, kidneys, and reproductive and nervous systems.
-in  children, causing potentially permanent learning and behaviour disorders
-Symptoms include abdominal pain, confusion, headache, anemia, irritability, and in severe cases seizures, coma, and death.
-in children it can be judged through thick line in bones in xrays
-in general by measuring amount of lead circulating in blood.

Food processing industry
-Huge opportunity ,we are leading agri producer but very less food is processed
-Also called sunrise industry as huge potential available
->Problems
-lack of trained manpower
-insufficient infra, supply chain and cold storage so many wasage
-APMC act -> farmers can't direct sell to processing units
-Food safety act 2006
	- Establishment of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
	-Under the Administrative control of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare	
	-for protecting and promoting public health through the regulation and supervision of food safety
	-Provide scientific advice to GOI on matter related to food
	-Form accreditation mechanism for laboratory and food items.
	-Quality controls for items import to india and exported from india
	-do survey and collect data about food consumption,contamination cases etc
	-promote general awareness in people
	-training program for capacity building
	-procedure for accreditation of certificate body engaged in providing certificates in food industry
	-frame scientific food standards,rules regulations and enforce them.
	-consist of a Chairperson and the following twenty-two 	members out of which one-third shall be women
	ACT-Onus on manufacturers: Food safety and standards ACT-2006, puts the onus of such issues on the manufacturer but in many cases they don't have control on the quality of raw materials supplied to them.
	-No licence for small industry only registration.
	-New justice dispensation system for fast track disposal of cases
	-
	-creates difficulty among the small and medium food producing industries by creating confusing as these industries fail to track the recommendations if the act
-R&D problem
-Heavy use of fertilizers and pesticides in agri
-lack of corporative farming culture and reducing land size	
-LAck of cohesion as multiple laws has been enacted by various ministries
-WTO measure like sanitation and hygine etc which are sometimes misused by importer country
- _ve outlook abraod due to various instances like high pesticides in coke,flies in alphonso mango and msg+lead in Maggie
